I left school when I was 15 and I started working in the pit when I was, you know, in September.
I was 15 in June, I went to the pit.
September, because you know, you want to space the time when you want to apply to go in the pits.
My class to go down the pit.
I went in when I was 15, I went in a couple of months.
Then my training in Boggard, or gallery it was called, and we had blocks there, you know,
learning us what was going to happen when you go down the pit, eventually get down the pit.
We done a bit of parking and we done road work and things like all the rails and different things
before we actually went underground.
Did they teach you a lot of health and safety things?
Oh yeah, they did in a way, yeah.
There was a lot of, well, because we was young, you know, you had a lot of young boys with us,
they didn't want to know, but they were saying we had to rely on each other, you know,
to get on with it because otherwise if you didn't, you could have an accident, you know,
which I remember one time he was doing a thing and this boy was just throwing material about
which he should have been doing, you know, and when he was told he wouldn't listen,
so they sucked, they were like, you know.
And do you agree with that?
You have to listen to what you were told otherwise, like when we eventually went underground,
it would be too dangerous to do things like that.
And when I went then underground and in the old school and it was called in Bargur itself,
like and he started to work and they had two different things like again,
like learning about safety and all and, you know, and that's how we went,
we went from there then, we did 16 weeks in there, we also went to college in Aswad Manak,
at the time he was the first, not the trainee, to go to Aswad Manak College.
And of course because we were to do with the mines, people in Aswad, the other students,
they would want to do different things, like someone's going in for lawyers,
someone's going in for to be a doctor and things like that, but because we were miners,
the teachers didn't like us a lot, to be honest.
Was it because you were miners or because you were disruptive?
No, I think it's because we were miners, to be honest, and you know.
Did they not think that, you know, you should be in college?
They more or less favored the other people rather than ourselves, like you know.
So did you manage to pass the college course?
Well, what it was, we wouldn't, like we had boys with us, and it was from the other valleys,
and all, they couldn't even sign their alphabet and all that, they didn't know it, to be honest.
I wouldn't call them dull, but they didn't care because they didn't want to learn like, you know.
Of course they learned their math when we were in college, we didn't do such a thing as,
like we wouldn't have to be educated as such, like, you know, with them, like to their standards,
like we were just there as miners because we have to go there and learn a little bit, like you know.
And, well, we went from there then, I went early in scholarly, went down to get there,
went into training phase, got on with it there, like you know, and working with this bloke,
like you know, and he said, you know, he's good fun, like you know, in the long times, like,
but he was a bit strict, like, and he said, you get him with it one day, and of course,
like he had his accident on his foot, I had an accident on my arm, like, you know, a stone fell and stuck in my arm.
And of course, it was a bit deep, like, and then this fellow come, the other miner come up,
and he had a chewbacca in his mouth, and just spit on it, like, he said, I'll do it.
And I was in, like, you know, I was in, like, you know, but he just laughed it off, like,
but I had to be able to work for a couple of days, like, because I was young, like, I was only 15 at the time,
and he said, you know, you've got to stay home, like, for a couple of days, like, you know.
And did you get paid?
Well, yeah, you get paid, you know, compensation, no compensation, but...
Sick pay.
Sick pay, yeah, I said, yeah, and, you know.
So did it heal completely?
Oh, it was alright after a day or two, like, but there was a funny part, like, when he spit the bacca on it,
like, you know, and just look at it, oh, it did get better, you know, I take the thing, like,
and he just laughed it off, like, you know.
But I went from there then to the face, and I ended up as what he called a pick-boy, like, you know,
but I was there, punches in the ground, like, and I was, my job then was to look after him, maintain him,
fix him up for the man that was actually on the call in the face to use, like, alright.
So anyway, that was my first job, and when I come out the train and face, I was a pick-boy, like, you know.
Did you enjoy it?
Oh, yeah, I enjoyed it, like, you know, but then you go, well, I went from there then,
I went on the timber for a couple of years because, to be honest, because I was good on the timber,
they kept me on the timber, right?
I could have had a job, say, in the face, but they said no, because, like, I just do,
they said to get the timber what I wanted, I just go and do it and make sure they had the supplies to do it,
like, you know, and they paid me the great end, the great end for great ones,
they could do a not job, you know, because they didn't want to get rid of me as a timber boy,
like, I didn't like it, but they didn't want me to, you know, go into the face, like, because...
Because you were too good at your job.
Yeah.
You know, and of course I was in it, and then I actually went into the face, and I, you know,
and Doubtedheazen bars they was calling, you know, Meetebars and Doubtedheazen, you know,
they had machine cutting all the coal in, I didn't have to actually dig one of them,
because stents as they used to call them, you'd say a 12 foot or 18 foot or 24 foot stents as they did on,
the better he was, the more you could do, like, and then so they would pay,
but he was on it, but the machine was cutting the coal, and we'd just put them bars and Doubtedheazen up,
like, you know, and we had pushers, and he was calling, and he just pushed the machine over,
it was a lot easier, you know.
And did you...
Well, it was years before, like, you know, I was lucky I got in at the right time,
when you did have to really work hard, like, on the coal, see.
And then I went from there then into the road work, like, you know.
So that was harder than what I was doing on the Doubtedheazen bars, like,
because you had to use a shovel and you had to pack four things,
and things like that, put the rings up, lock them and things like that.
This sounds like a hard job in the minefield.
Yeah, but I enjoyed doing it, like, you know.
Then, of course, we had different grades, and he'd come in,
and when you had different grades, and he'd come in, grade one was 22 pounds,
grade two was 18 pounds, and you'd have a bit less if it was a grade three in the road,
which I didn't agree with, because we still all had to do the same amount of work, really.
And they changed it in the end, and then you all had the same amount of money, like.
But we were doing different things, like, like, I was in the road,
and then we were doing different jobs, like.
Like, you know, Dr. Cooley was in the team, and they'd say,
oh, come up the road today, you know, we're going to the face, and then from there,
then you're going to do other things, like, even sometimes they tell you to go
park out and drive things, and things like that, you know,
when anything keeps the cold coming out, you know, and that.
Did you know of any people with any kind of disabilities,
whether it was a learning disability, a physical disability working in the mines,
or had a disability from an accident?
I knew some I couldn't read and write, you know, but they got on with the job,
as long as they could do the work, they didn't care about the education side of it, you know.
I had buddies that couldn't read and write, they didn't care.
Well, I wasn't too clever myself, you know, but they got on with the job, like, you know.
As long as they could do the work, they didn't mind, you know,
they didn't worry about whether they was educated or not, really, like, you know.
I knew people, like my friend, he had polio when he was young,
and he came into the pit to work, like, you know, and we used to limp a lot,
like, they gave him a good job, like, you know, he just got on with it and all.
Did they make any allowances? Did you have anything to help him?
Well, you know, they allowed him to work at the ground with us, like, you know,
and we had had polio, like, and his one leg wasn't, you know, right,
he was limping all the time, like, and as long as he could get on with the work,
they didn't mind, like, you know, like he did do.
Was there any kind of discrimination against people who did it?
No, not really, no. We didn't discriminate things from people.
The thing is that, as long as they could do the work, and, you know,
they just got on with it, like, you know, they didn't bother about anything,
as long as you've done your work.
It does sound very... Yeah.
...equalities, you know, everybody's equal when you're down the pit.
The only thing is, like you're saying about different things that happened
when I was here, like, one of my friends got killed in the pit, like, you know,
he got buried and he died like a stick.
How did he die? He was not killed. He was winning.
He was a measuring boy, like, he went into measure,
and the men was having their food outside,
and he went out, and we got all the way, he got tied up in the air,
and they just clapped, you know, and he got killed that way.
The friend of mine, he lived in the same street as him, and all that, like, you know, and...
And was his family compensated?
Well, I don't know why, but we never went into it.
I know what I mean in them days, like, they did,
but money meant nothing, like, our compensation really did it, one.
They lost their son, like, and we lost a friend.
And then another friend, then he got killed in there.
One time, like, we played and all that, and he got killed in a nasty way, like, you know.
He was dragging rings, he was working on, and he'd been on the electrician
with the outside doing something to the parlance for the, like, cut down his big wheel
with the cutter, like, and he'd run down the parlance, and then chopped him up, like.
You know, well, you know about that now.
But you know what I mean.
And then I had another friend, then, he was the one of me, got killed with the cutter and all that, you know.
So I was all in Elliot's pit, like, you know.
And were things changed after these terrible accidents?
Yes. The thing is that really when, what happened was there's, like, you know,
they were saying it wasn't an electrician's fault and it wasn't nobody's fault, really, like,
but you know what I mean.
He shouldn't have, he shouldn't have been working, you know what I mean?
Yeah, they kind of said he shouldn't have been there.
He didn't know. He didn't even know anybody, even his friend.
You know, working on for a couple of accidents, you know.
Of course, I was at the place.
Oh, gosh.
So how did it affect you as a fellow miner? How did it affect you?
Well, it's terrible, isn't it?
You know, with your friends, like, you don't know.
You don't want to, well, your neighbour, especially when Les got killed, like, in it,
because he was so well known, wasn't he?
No, Les was, like, in there.
They, well, I can't say, you know what I mean, how the family felt, like, you know what I mean.
The way, you know, what happened to him, like, there wasn't much left of him, like, you know what I mean.
Oh, it's terrible.
But with the other two, at least they had a body, too.
Yeah, yeah.
You know, one body, the other, like, you know.
It seems like the amount of tragedy that happens in a coal mining, the camaraderie is kind of, they go hand in hand, I think.
I think you have to have that kind of camaraderie to cope.
You still have to work, you know what I mean, like, you want to work even that up, like, you know, and you know, it's so sad and all, like, but you have to get on with it, like, you know.
That's really sad.
Well, you know about it.
See, just get on with the job, like, you know, and always sad and all of it.
Yeah.
When it's up, then nothing nobody can do about it, like, you know.
And we went, you know, and we went from there and down to Elliot's Clothes, then I went to Bedford's Pit down there.
Down in Bedford's Pit it was different to Elliot's. Elliot's Pit was more like a big family, because we were all, when we went to Bedford's Pit there was a lot of foreigners working, like Poles and Missouanians.
They were like, oh, he wasn't the same as us, some of them, you know, because they were more selfish than us in a way, like, you know, like, where we'd say, be doing a job, we'd say, oh, I'm having so much.
Oh, and I am, but they wouldn't tell us how much he was earning, see, you know what I mean? That type of thing, like, you know.
But if there was an accident, would everybody...
Oh, if it was an accident, we'd be all together like that then.
Yeah, good, yeah.
But, like, they'd be selfish, where they wouldn't tell you how much you were earning, like, you know what I mean?
Yeah.
Why not tell us, like, you know, they'd give them rates, they'd get all the work.
When I went to Bedford's Pit, I suppose they didn't include one turn at a later point, like belt turning and all that.
I didn't know nothing about that, because we had to learn on the spot, like, you know, went there, we managed with work, and I like, you know, some of the foreigners, they had to show us what to do, because we'd never seen, like, the other, like, the Kunchum walker machine, it was called.
Like a jigger, you know. I'd never even seen one, I know, I know, tuned it.
And they'd have to learn us what to do. And they had to learn on the spot, like, when they would tell us how to do it, they could work on it.
And they would do, in fact, they'd say, like, well, they wouldn't finish the job, we had to do other jobs before we turned out, like, get an extra call-off to make sure we could get the machine opening things.
Well, that meant then we'd be late doing it.
Of course, these folks didn't mind, because they knew they could work on, we couldn't work on, because we had to catch a bus to get open up.
But they were local, most of them, like, you know, and we didn't mind, like, we still got on with the job, still got on together, like, you know, they were doing all right.
But it was good days, like, a bad day, you know what I mean, like, you know.
Your whole experience, would you say, was enjoyable?
Oh, fantastic, I wouldn't change it, but, you know, it was just things that were happening, like, you know, in it.
And, like, I had another friend, and he just dropped dead in the ground, like, because I was in his old man to me, like, you know what I mean, and he was just on a switch, as they'd call it, and we went to catch a bus, and he said, oh, where's he gone, and he wouldn't tell us what happened.
Well, by the time he got on, he said, oh, he must be working on, like, you know, and he must have had a lift home, but he had died, like, and he wouldn't tell us.
So, of course, my friend then, like, he said, oh, I've got to go past his house, and his wife every morning used to be on the door, and we found out in the end, like, that he had died, and they wouldn't tell us anything, you know, before we went.
And, you know, the bus started, like, someone slipped up, and oh, he died, you know. He didn't know what to say to his wife.
So, one thing, like, I like, you know, it's sad, but, you know, but they get on with it, and then you do different jobs, and, like, you know, you just go back to work the same day, and all, and get on.
You have to like it. You can have fun to say, oh, well, he died, so he can't go to work, and you're into the funeral, and things like that, but, no, he don't say, I will offer some of the mine, the pit might turn out in the morning, and say, oh, you can have a day off.
But sometimes they turn out and say, oh, you bet you're going to make out, I want to, or whatever, like, you know what I mean. So.
Well, thank you very much.
And then, when the pit finished, then, like, and then started off, and we started off with this, he was saying, oh, do you want to come in business with me? He said, what are we doing, Billy? He said, putting toilets down the pit.
And then, when we were done with the job, and the bed was picked after the strike in the 1950s, about 55 strike, and we were the first pit to close, and we got a super idea, this was a job anyway, you know.
So, we had done a lot of work before we went back into the pits, like, carry on with it, putting toilets down the pit, but they come out there and help in safety, so some pits are to have them put in, you know, you know, you went up to Yorkshire and you said, I don't have them.
So, we also worked in private mines and all, adrift mines and all that, you know what I mean. When it was for mines, it didn't just in coal, it was the coal, but it was various mines, you know what I mean.
And, well, we had the money for it, you know, but the pits closed so quickly, so we had to go into, we were with film companies and stuff like that, you know what I mean.
And they were saying, oh, do all the money, but they didn't give us money to do it, we had to pay all the money we borrowed and off of board and all to set it up and all that, we had to pay it all back, they didn't give it to us.
Right.
So, which, well, you know, money to do it like that and different things like that.
Okay, thank you very much. Glen, have you got anything to add?
The man he was saying about foreigners, Poles and Lithuanians mostly worked for Tysons, which were contractors to the coal board.
That's why they were on different rates of money to us. They were on better money, a lot better money, because, yeah, a lot better money than we were on, but they worked the downside out of it too.
Right.
They worked, they would do anything, they would do anything, you know, and they worked, like, long hours, but they were, you know, Tysons were...
No, when I done it, when I'm saying this, when we went from Elliot's pit to Bedford's pit, they were supposed to be the same as us.
They wasn't working, they was working for the board, they wasn't working for Tysons.
No.
They was working for us, for the board, you know, the ones we were, I'm on about that, you know.
And, you know, like we're saying Tysons or other, they was hard working and they did do, they deserved their money, because they would do anything, you know.
We had a woman, they say they'd be one in junctions and saying, like, which big curders and all that.
They knew the work and they knew how to do it, they was working like Tysons and all that, which they did deserve their money for it, you know, and I'm not saying they didn't deserve it.
But what I'm saying is, when we was there, when we went from Elliot's to Bedford's, it was a different thing, you know.